in this video we are going to learn how to
insert a node in a binary search tree
So this is the code to implement the programme and
we have the function insert into which we pass the
root of the tree at the value to be inserted
and it will insert that value into the binary search
tree
So we have public node insert node root comma int val
the so First we begin from the main function so
used the constructor Binary search tree which creates an empty
binary search tree
So here we can create tree named BST
So our empty
Binary search tree is created
Now let us insert the element hundred into it so
we call the function insert by passing the root and
the Value 100 so right BST dot root equal to
BST dot Insert of dot root comma 100 So the
control goes to function
Insert Let us see what happens
here first we need to check if the root
equal null to that is if the tree is empty and here it is
so we can create a new node with the given
value and return it
So as we discussed in the previous video We created
a constructor to create a new node with the passed
value so used that here
So write return new node of val
So a new node with the value 100 and left
and right null will be created and is returned to
main function
The root of the binary search tree now points to
this node so now our binary search tree is having
one node which will be the root node with value
100 at address 1024 and it is pointing to null
on both sides
Now we continue execution in main function So we have
next function called here with value 50 So the control
goes to insert function again and there we check if root
equal to null but it is not so
We need to find word to insert this element
If the passed value is less than root it goes
to left side And if it is greater than root
it goes to right side So we check else If
root key is less than 50 and it is not
true
So we check else If root Key is greater than
50 which is true So we set root left equal
to insert of root left comma Val
So that is a recursion
And the operation is simply If the value to be
inserted is less than root it should be inserted to
the left side
And we call the function again by passing the root as
root left which is null here
so call insert of Null comma 50 and first we
check if root equal to null which is true
So we create a new node with key 50 at
address 2024 it's returned to function insert function root
comma 50 and that will be stored in root left
which means hundreds left pointing to 50 and we return
the root to main function
And now the binary search tree looks like this
Now we want to insert 150
So we called a function again and control goes to function
insert and we check if root equal to null
But we have root equal to 1024
So the condition fails
And now we check
If root key which is 100 is less than 150
it is true
So we set root right equal to insert of root
right comma Val and what we're doing here is we
found that 150 is greater than the root so
it must be inserted to the right side of the
root
So we recursively
called the function insert by passing null and 150
there we first check if root equal to null
and that is true
So we create a new node and a new node
with key 150 is created at address 3024 in
the heap section and that is returned to the calling
function
And from there it is returned to the first insert
function and that it is stored to root right that
is right of node with value 100
And it points to 3024 root is returned to the
main function
And now the BST looks like this 100
being the root and 50 being the left child and
150 being the right child
And now let us insert another element 125 so
we can call insert of root comma Val which
is 125
So control goes to function insert
And there we first check if root equal to null
but it is not
So we check if 125 is greater than or
less than the root so it is greater than the
root
So set root Right equal to insert of root right
Comma val that is 3024 comma 125 so we are
calling insert again and we check if root equal to
null
But it is 3024 not null so we check whether
it should go to right or left
That is if it is greater than or less than
150 it is less than 150
So we set root left that is left of 150
equal to insert of null comma 125
So we are calling insert again and first we need
to check if root equal to null and it is
so create a
New node with key 125 at address 4024
and that is returned to calling functions
First to insert of null comma 125 and from
there to insert of 3024 comma 125 and
one fifty's left will now point to 4024
that is our new node and returned root to insert
of 1024 comma 125
So here set right of 100 to 3024 finally returned
root to main function
So that is how are binary search
tree finally looks like
So this is how we can perform insertion in a
binary search tree.